# Conclusions

The results of the analyses for the Frozen Policy scenario show that, even in the absence of energy policy measures aimed at achieving the target transition of the energy system (i.e. without stimulating the implementation of the potential of energy efficiency and renewable energy (RE), and the introduction of environmental restrictions), primary energy supply and final energy consumption will grow towards 2050. However, it is unlikely they will exceed 2012 levels. Under such conditions, the structure of the energy system will depend, first of all, on the projected fuel prices and the changes in the value of energy technologies. At the same time, coal will remain the dominant resource both in the fuel supply of power plants, and, in general, to meet the energy needs of the economy.

The Reference scenario, which reflects the conditions and main targets of the Energy Strategy of Ukraine until 2035, maintains the energy consumption at the level of 2015, while simultaneously targeting increased use of RE and reducing the consumption of coal and natural gas. However, the NES 2035 holds some uncertainty about strategic issues in the development of the energy sector for the longer term (until 2050), in particular with regard to the development of nuclear energy, which leads to a corresponding sharp change in the structure of electricity generation and the dynamics of GHG emissions.

The results of the No New Nuclear 2025 scenario show that once achieving the objectives of the NES, in particular a significant reduction of the energy intensity of the economy and a significant increase in the use of RE, the existing nuclear units will not be operating at full load, thus resulting in the postponement of the construction of a new block number 3 at the Khmelnitsky plant from 2025 to not earlier than 2030-2035. At the same time, the generation from other power facilities will not differ from the Reference scenario.

In a scenario of moderate growth of renewable electricity production (Low Renewable Growth), as proposed in the Report on the conformity assessment (adequacy) of the generating capacity of the State Enterprise "NEC" Ukrenergo for 2018, the total share of RE in the power generation will increase only to 41% in 2050 (compared to 63 % in the Reference scenario), but in 2035 it would be about 31%, which is more than the what the NES 2035 suggests. Replacing (compared with the Reference scenario) the generation of electricity from RE for more expensive thermal generation after 2035 will affect the total cost of electricity in the system, which in the end can reduce the consumption of electricity by 5-7%.

Currently, the balancing of power stations is mainly performed through the "dirty" coal generation, which causes the emergence of the so-called "Green-coal paradox". According to the model calculations, the use of modern balancing capacities and maneuvering technologies will reduce capital investment to achieve the stated goals of using renewable energy by 13 billion € for the period 2020-2050. In addition, the use of advanced precision forecasting systems will further reduce investment needs by an additional 11.5 billion €, while increasing production of electricity from RE.

The inclusion of targets from existing sectoral program documents to the strategy NES 2035 will not radically affect the future development of the energy system - the deviation of the basic aggregate energy balance indicators from their values in the Reference scenario is observed at 2-5%. However, particularly in the transport and residential sectors, energy consumption patterns differ significantly from those in the Reference scenario. In addition, there may be a certain redistribution of investment resources and individual fuel types across sectors. This indicates the potential for improvement of the existing procedures for the harmonization of sectoral policies, and the need to update the indicators of the NES 2035.

As the analyses have shown, the realization of ambitious targets for decarbonising the Ukrainian economy in the scenario Low Carbon Society will in fact only require the continuation of the policies and measures initiated by the NES 2035. Although this will require additional intensification of investments, the relaxation or complete abandoning of the implementation of the decarbonization policy can quickly offset the achievements, in particular the reduction of energy intensity, GHG and pollutant emissions.